Fiction teachers seminar, institute at the University of Kansas and James Gunn was one
of the, oh here's Jim Bain, raise your hand.
She's going to tell you a little bit about the history of the play.
She's one of the authors of it.
And then I'm going to introduce the cast and we're going to get started.
Yeah, you'll get to say hi and stuff when I...
Yeah.
As Susie just said, this story was written this summer at the Third Annual Intensive
English Institute on the Teaching of Science Fiction.
And if you think the title was bad, you should have been at the course.
We went to class from nine o'clock in the morning until nine o'clock in the evening
for three weeks.
And we got a little crazy, like this t-shirt, and like this story.
Two of the books on the reading list were James Gunn's The Road to Science Fiction 1
and 2.
And when it came time to title our story, it seemed perfectly natural to just extend his
metaphor because this story really is stuck on the shoulder of the road.
We also, of course, had to include Jim Gunn's campus in the story, as well as set it in
Kansas where the class took place.
And also, Steve Goldman was one of the teachers besides Jim Gunn, and they spent three weeks
debating whether or not J. G. Belard wrote science fiction.
Naturally, we got tired of hearing it, so J. G. Belard became our villain, and the debate
was the subject of our story.
We also got a little crazy with the punning.
It's not that bad.
I just figured...
Good.
So that's it, stuck on the shoulder of the road to science fiction.
In case you were wondering, the frisking at the door was to make sure none of you were
carrying anything throwable.
Both of them.
From that side to this, in the cast, we have beautiful...
Oh, I'm Jim Teacher.
We have beautiful but dumb, who is Cliff Flint.
Testing one two.
Cliff, you're going to have to speak up.
You've got such a delicate voice.
Pat Buchanan is our lovely science fiction writer called Stila Idea.
Closer to the mic.
Next, we have our guest of honor, Mary Ann Mueller, and she is the wonderful mad scientist,
Dr. Loom.
Tell them what Dr. Loom's first name is.
Yes, she does.
It's fruit of the, isn't it?
You'll get the references.
Next to Mary is Mark Bernstein, and he is our villain, J.G.
This is called casking against type, of course.
Ha!
And our narrator, Meg Cadlac.
And I'm Susie, and I'm Tila Brown.
And I don't know what that is.
You were lucky to get the floor.
Oh, jeez.
Can we get some more corner?
Oh, I'm sorry.
Sound effects by Nancy Tucker, and they were all her idea.
I had nothing to do with it.
All right.
Thank you.
Stuck on the shoulder of the road to science fiction.
In a small and cluttered laboratory in Erawan, Kansas,
Dr. Loom, a frizzy-haired, absent-minded, thick-lensed,
white-jacketed, ever-so-slightly-mad scientist,
is conducting experiments.
Bursting into the room a beautiful but dumb young man,
BBD, skips up to the doctor.
Be with me, you're so smart.
I wish I could understand your invention.
Don't worry, you're a pretty little head about
at my sweet little papaya.
Why don't you read your comic book?
Dr. Loom turns back to the sparking panel,
while BBD, waiting a few moments to be sure
the conversation has ended,
tiptoes gingerly to the high wooden stool in the corner.
The massive wooden door shakes
to the beat of a loud, powerful knock.
A slightly stooped, hunchbacked robot
with large protruding eyes
leaves in a strong, silent, but mildly aberrant
science fiction writer.
The robot shambles over to Dr. Loom,
hands her a small white card
and retreats from the laboratory.
Good afternoon, Dr. Loom.
I am Stila Idea, star reporter
and brilliant science fiction writer
for a standing robotics magazine, otherwise known as ARM.
I can read that on your card, young lady.
However, I'm a scientific genius
and very busy at the moment.
I have no time to fritter away at idle conversation,
so if you'll pardon me.
Dr. Loom turns away.
Excuse me, doctor, have you forgotten
our appointment to discuss your latest
world shattering invention?
Oh, of course.
Do excuse me, I have so much on my mind.
Come over here and let me introduce you to Ego,
the electronic gizmo orienter.
Dr. Loom eagerly grabs Stila's beefy bicep
and drags her toward a trapezoidal edifice of gleaming metal.
Pulsing lights dot the upper third of the machine,
like a theater marquee on opening night.
A control panel, arrayed with a dizzying assortment
of dials and switches, protrudes from the center of the trapezoid.
Stila's eyes are immediately drawn, however,
to a cylindrical shaft set into the right side of the machine.
Two words, scrawled in orange day glow letters,
straddle the shaft.
As you probably know, Ms. Dia,
it has long been my aim in life to bring all people
the ineffable ecstasy I've known from reading science fiction,
and I think I've finally found the perfect method.
From his stool in the corner,
BBD has been surreptitiously glancing at the two women.
Ever since Stila I.D.A. had entered the room,
BBD's heart had pounded frantically,
and his sculptured hands had perspired.
This humble machine you see before you
has the power to alter mainstream fiction
by introducing a disjunctive element into the story,
thus changing mundane literature into its highest form,
science fiction!
Thank you!
But how does it work, Doctor?
The Doctor launches into a long technical explanation
which confuses Stila and totally baffles BBD.
Do you mean to say that all I have to do
is push this lever to activate the machine?
Oh no, no, don't touch that!
The lever moves both ways.
If you push it towards the word dis,
ego will change mundane literature to science fiction.
But if the lever is in the dis-disposition,
science fiction loses its disjunctive element
and becomes mundane.
Heaven forbid, Doctor,
that anyone would ever do such a dastardly deed.
At that moment, the robot appears in the doorway
with an apologetic expression on its chrome face
and informs Doctor Loom that an urgent message
has just arrived from Senator Proxmire.
With an exasperated shake of her frizzy head,
Doctor Loom leaves, followed by her faithful robot.
Stila, left to her own devices, begins examining the lab,
carefully avoiding contact with the crucial lever.
She scans the rack of test tubes,
smoking vials and moldy Petri dishes.
Suddenly, it is as if there were a spark from across the room.
Two pairs of eyes meet and for a moment, time stops.
BBD slowly rises from his stool,
the comic book slipping from his grasp.
Stila rushes forward to retrieve the magazine.
Part of me, I think you've drunk this.
Stila glances at the cover.
Gosh, are you a deaf Dodger's fan too?
BBD blushes prettily.
You'll never believe this,
but I have an exquisite collection of deaf Dodgers holograms
in my apartment.
If you are free tonight, perhaps I could show them to you.
Gee, I'd love to, but I'm not sure my mother would approve.
She doesn't have to know.
Leave the alley door unlocked and I'll meet you here tonight.
Okay.
Later that night, BBD impatiently paces in the laboratory.
A soft scuffling sound from the alley attracts his attention.
He throws open the door and finds himself face to face
with a sinister figure.
Little does he know that the tall, skinny, leather-booted,
black-caped man wearing a wide brimmed hat which tilts over his face,
revealing only a foo-man-chew mustache,
is the diabolical J.G.
BBD fates.
With animal cunning, J.G. lifts the crumpled body
and staggers into the alley, where waits a large but dumpy,
mushroom-shaped vehicle.
Across the side of the ship are stenciled the words,
Chee-Chee Engineers Ring World Kansas.
J.G. flings the limp body into the craft and clangs shut the door.
He slinks back to the laboratory.
Once inside, he is instinctively drawn toward ego.
He studies the control panel for a moment,
then begins to manipulate dials and switches.
Meanwhile, back outside, our unsuspecting heroine
strides confidently toward the laboratory door.
With a keen glance, she takes note of the unusual vehicle
parked inconveniently in the alley.
Mildly annoyed, she circles it.
She gently pushes the laboratory door open.
J.G., who hears the hinges creak,
whips around only to find himself confronting the cool, clear eyes of Stila I.D.ia.
Who are you and what are you doing?
I'm a maintenance representative of serviceable pros, Inc.
I'm doing a monthly service check on the disjunctor.
Oh well, have you seen Mr. Loom's son, BBD?
No, and if you'll excuse me, I must be going.
Flipping through a copy of Doc Dodger's,
Stila hears a rumble in the alley.
It suddenly hits her.
That's funny. That ship belonged to a different company.
Who was that caped man?
Stila rushes outside and sees the mushroom-shaped ship dwindling in the distance.
She jumps into a bright red roadster
and races after it through the gateway,
over the mainstream, across the campus,
over the river and through the woods,
to the sinister castle harlan.
Meanwhile, back at the laboratory,
a voice filters down from upstairs.
Is that you, my little cantaloupe?
Little does Doc Dillum know,
but her little cantaloupe is at this moment lying unconscious
at the feet of the evil J.G.
Curses! I didn't have time to alter ego.
And now that meddling fool has followed me here.
I've got to take care of her.
At this moment, BBD regains consciousness and jumps to his feet.
I recognize you. You are J.G. My mother's archenemy.
Yes, you naive little fool.
For years, your mother and I have been competing for control of fiction.
As soon as I can get rid of that meddler,
I will use your mother's machine for my own ends.
But what's going to happen to me?
You will stay here and do as you're told,
if you know what's good for you.
J.G. stalks off the ship, locking the door behind him.
Confused and bewildered, BBD flings himself across the control board
and begins to cry.
The ship rumbles.
BBD is thrust to the floor by the force of the acceleration.
In a matter of seconds, the ship's engines grind to a halt.
With a sob, BBD faints.
While all this has been happening,
Stila somehow manages to find a seldom used secret door to Castle Harlan.
She stealthily descends the cold, damp stairs
and arrives at a dimly lit passageway.
Light streams through an open door at the far end of the quarter.
Stila creeps toward the door.
Cautiously, she steps inside.
She stares for a moment at the white-patted walls of the tiny cubicle.
Directly opposite the door, the wall is lined with dusty shelves
holding a plethora of bottles.
And in some of the bottles are things.
The door slams shut.
The room is plunged into darkness.
Meanwhile, back at the laboratory,
Dr. Loom is frantically searching for BBD.
At her wit's end, she turns to ego for help.
If I can only orient ego to the brainwave pattern of BBD,
perhaps it can locate my missing little grape cluster.
Almost instantaneously, a signal light flashes.
The speaker emits a small, frightened voice.
I? Could it be?
Back at Castle Harlan, Stila pounds at the locked door.
A voice booms from somewhere above her.
I hope you enjoy your stay.
It will be a long one.
Feel free to sample my wine collection.
You really must try the amontillado.
What have you done with BBD?
But there is no answer.
Only the fading echo of demonic laughter.
For the love of God, Montresor!
In a fit of ebbedification, Stila sweeps a row of bottles off the shelf.
By a fortuitous coincidence,
her fingers brush against a hidden switch.
The door swings open. She is free.
At this moment in the laboratory, the small, frightened voice cries out.
Still?
Our scientific genius adjusts numerous dials,
frantically attempting to pinpoint her son's position.
Bursting through the door with a robot at her heels,
Stila confronts Dr. Loom.
What's going on around here?
That's what I'd like to know, young lady.
After lengthy but hurried explanations,
Dr. Loom and Stila agree that ego is their only hope.
We need only one more coordinate to be able to triangulate BBD's position.
At that very moment, the small voice cries out again.
Live?
Within a matter of seconds, ego fixes his position.
Armed with this information, Dr. Loom and Stila rush to the experimental FTL ship,
parked in a stylo behind the laboratory.
Dr. Loom works the controls and the ship hurtles into outer space.
Where are we going?
To the Crab Nebula.
If ego is right, we may have seen the last of BBD.
What do you mean?
Don't you know?
The center of the Crab Nebula is a black hole.
Stila gasps.
By the time Dr. Loom finishes explaining black holes to Stila, they have arrived.
Stila activates the view screen.
Where is he?
Do you see that speck out there?
He is orbiting the black hole.
There isn't much time.
The two women stare at each other in consternation.
Suddenly, a space-suited figure riding a lumbering multi-legged beast appears.
An expert in alien biology, Stila recognizes it as a galloping coincidence.
A voice crackles over the speaker.
Who are you guys anyway?
And what are you doing here?
This is Dr. Loom, scientific genius.
We are on an urgent rescue mission to save my son from being captured by the black hole.
Who are you?
Oh, I'm Stila Brown, and by a stroke of luck, I may be able to help you.
Do you have any ruby red slippers aboard?
Why, I'm wearing some.
Listen carefully then.
Close your eyes.
And click your heels together three times, whispering the words,
come to me, my melancholy baby.
Breathlessly, Stila follows the instructions to the letter.
Instantaneously, BBD appears at her side.
The reunion is brief, but poignant.
Answering their pressing questions, BBD recounts his conversation with J.G.
That diabolical fiend, he must be stumped.
J.G. has not been idle during the rescue operation.
Short-circuiting the robot, he has gained entrance to the laboratory once more,
where he is now in the process of carrying out his evil scheme.
Fearing the worst, Stila and company rush back to the lab.
Alas, they are too late.
With a flick of the switch, J.G. sets the machinery into motion.
Nothing can stop it now.
In libraries and bookstores across the world, the machine begins subverting science fiction.
Dying inside becomes death of a salesman.
Babel 17 turns into Tristum Shandy.
Dune is changed into Lawrence of Arabia.
Ringworld becomes the story of O.
And the world of Nal'e is transformed into the Scarlet Letter.
But then, ego encounters the work of J.G. Belard.
The machinery begins to hum and whine.
Sparks fly from the circuit panels.
The metal grows hotter and hotter, and the machine begins to tremble and rock.
Is J.G. Belard a science fiction writer?
It is twilight, and the machine stops.
Thank you, people. It is now your first appreciation.